Curriculum Vitae
================

A .pdf version of this CV can be downloaded here.

Education

Sep 2017 - Present

PhD: Atmospheric and Environmental Sciences

The University of Edinburgh

Biodiversity - Ecosystem Function Relationships in Southern African
Woodlands

I am investigating patterns of tree species diversity and their
relationship with ecosystem structure and function in southern African
woodlands. I use large datasets from the SEOSAW project extensively to
answer macro-ecological questions. I also utilise the SEOSAW plot
network infrastructure to conduct my own measurements of woodland canopy
structure using Terrestrial LiDAR technology. Most recently I have
conducted a regional scale study of the interacting functional
mechanisms which relate tree species diversity to woody biomass across
multiple environmental gradients, using measurements from the SEOSAW
plot network.

Sep 2012 - Jun 2016

BSc Hons: Ecological and Environmental Sciences - 1st Class

The University of Edinburgh

Sep 2009 - Jul 2011

A-Levels: Geology (A*), Geography (A), Biology (A)

Queen Elizabeth Sixth Form College, Darlington, County Durham

Research & Outreach Grants

-   Feb 2019 - Davis Expedition Fund - £4000 - Tanzania research
    expedition funding
-   Jun 2018 - NERC bursary - £980 - Applied Plant Taxonomy and Field
    Survey Skills course at Kew Gardens
-   May 2018 - Principals Go Abroad Fund - £350 - Mozambique SEOSAW
    Network Meeting funding
-   Feb 2018 - School of GeoSciences Facilities Committee - Research
    Equipment Grant - £2810 - Camera equipment for hemispherical tree
    canopy photography
-   Nov 2017 - James Rennie Bequest - £170 - Costs for British
    Ecological Society Coding Club Workshop
-   Nov 2017 - Centenary Agroforestry 89 Fund - £984 - Angola research
    expedition funding
-   Nov 2017 - British Ecological Society - Small Grant - £1500 -
    Funding to run Scottish Tropical Ecology and Biology Student Meeting
-   Nov 2017 - Institute for Academic Development - Action Fund Small
    Grant - £470 - Funding to run Scottish Tropical Ecology and Biology
    Student Meeting
-   Mar 2016 - Royal Society of Biology - Travel Grant - £500 - Canadian
    Arctic research expedition funding
-   Dec 2015 - Friends of Roslin Glen - Outreach Fund - £900 - Landscape
    history panel funding
-   Nov 2015 - Lothian Conservation Volunteers - Outreach Fund - £500 -
    Landscape history panel funding
-   May 2015 - Principal’s Go Abroad Fund - £350 - Peruvian Andes
    research expedition funding
-   Apr 2015 - British Travel Association Fund - £1000 - Peruvian Andes
    research expedition funding

Awards

-   2019 - Edinburgh Teaching award
    -   Completed a programme aiming to improve teaching skills for
        higher education. Worked with a mentor over the course of an
        academic year to produce a series of reflective essays, drawing
        on pedagogical literature and teaching experiences. As part of
        the award I was inducted as an Associate Fellow of the Higher
        Education Academy.
-   2017 - SEECC Conference - Best Long Presentation
    -   Best 15 minute talk from a group of 24 at the Scottish Ecology,
        Environment and Conservation Conference, hosted by the
        University of Aberdeen. The talk presented research on forest
        structure and climate induced range shifts.
-   2017 - STEB Conference - Best Presentation
    -   Best 15 minute talk from a group of 13 at the Scottish Tropical
        Ecology and Biology Student Meeting, hosted by the University of
        Stirling. The talk presented research on tree species
        competition interactions and climate induced range shifts.
-   2015 - Edinburgh Award
    -   Professional development course at the University of Edinburgh.
        Attended seminars on professional skills: public speaking,
        academic writing and leadership. Conducted self-evaluation over
        the course of one year.

Manuscripts and Published Work

-   Godlee J. L., … - Diversity and Structure of an Arid Woodland in
    Southwest Angola, with Comparison to the Wider Miombo Ecoregion
    -   Diversity - April 2020
    -   Invited contribution to special issue: Biodiversity of
        Vegetation and Flora in Tropical Africa
-   Godlee J. L., … - Variation in forest canopy structure along an
    Andean elevation gradient causes species-specific stress responses
    in tree seedlings
    -   In preparation - Plant Biology - 2020
-   Godlee J. L., … - Geographically and genetically distinct
    populations of scots pine (Pinus sylvestris) differ in resistance to
    damage by the large pine weevil (Hylobius abietis): a common garden
    translocation study
    -   In preparation - Forest Ecology and Management - 2020
-   Rowland, L. … Godlee J. L. - Drought stress and tree size determine
    stem CO₂ efflux in a tropical forest
    -   New Phytologist - 2018
-   Daskalova, G. N. … Godlee J. L. - Rare and common vertebrates span a
    wide spectrum of population trends
    -   bioRxiv - 2019

Research vision

As I progressed through my undergraduate degree in Ecological and
Environmental Sciences I developed a keen interest in whole ecosystem
responses to environmental gradients, with a particular focus on tree
competition and physiognomy as mechanisms which determine ecosystem
function. I pursued this interest through my undergraduate dissertation
for which I conducted a 56 day field campaign, studying competition
interactions and eco-physiological traits in tree seedlings in the
Peruvian Andes. This field work, along with four other notable periods
of employment as a research assistant in the Brazilian Amazon, the
Canadian Arctic, The Republic of Congo and the Scottish lowlands made me
proficient in undertaking logistically challenging field-based science.

During these short research contracts I have formed ideas about the
development of novel methodologies in community ecology. Particularly, I
am interested in using emerging technologies to answer ecological
questions that have in the past relied on subjective and highly
uncertain data. I have pursued many of my interests through my current
PhD programme, in which I am using terrestrial LiDAR and the large
SEOSAW plot network dataset to answer questions about the relationship
between tree species diversity and ecosystem structure in southern
African woodlands. I continue to conduct ambitious field campaigns
combined with powerful statistical techniques to distill complex
ecological data down to its basic mechanisms.

I support the development of effective teaching in higher education. In
2019 I completed the Edinburgh Teaching Award, a programme encouraging
self-evaluation and consideration of pedagogical technique. Since
October 2016 I have worked with a colleague to develop “Coding Club” a
supportive peer network for learning statistical programming at the
University of Edinburgh. In the future I hope to forge an academic
career in a university as I enjoy researching alongside other academics,
sharing knowledge for the greater good, and writing robust
inter-disciplinary science.

Academic & Research Experience

-   May-Jun 2017 - Fieldwork co-ordinator - University of Edinburgh -
    Dr. Edward Mitchard
    -   Managed the fieldwork season of a long term experiment in
        collaboration with the US Forest Service, the Wildlife
        Conservation Society and Paula Nieto-Quintano, a PhD student at
        the University of Edinburgh. Fieldwork was conducted in the
        remote and logistically challenging Bateke Plateau region of The
        Republic of Congo. I supervised the work of three students from
        Marien Ngouabi University, Brazzaville for three weeks. I also
        co-ordinated the work of 8-10 maintenance workers responsible
        for creating firebreaks around field sites. Fieldwork involved
        full growth and mortality tree censuses in 25 ha plots, followed
        by controlled burning of the plots.
-   Sep-Dec 2016 - Research assistant - University of Exeter - Dr. Lucy
    Rowland
    -   Part of an 8 person research team with 6 weeks fieldwork at the
        Caxiuanã Esecaflor drought experiment. Extensive work with
        Li-COR 6400XT Portable Photosynthesis System, collection and
        subsequent analysis of leaf traits. Lab-work at the University
        of Exeter included use of CAN-EYE Leaf Area Index analysis
        software and developing a method for the analysis of foliar
        fungal infections from scanned leaf images. In Exeter I also
        worked with a large time series dataset of leaf traits collected
        a 10 year period to analyse the effects of experimentally
        induced drought on canopy tree growth and photosynthetic
        capacity.
-   Mar-Aug 2016 - Field assistant - University of Edinburgh - Dr. Isla
    Myers-Smith
    -   Part of a 4 person field team with 2 months fieldwork at Kluane
        Lake Research Station and Herschel Island (Qikiqtaruk) in the
        Yukon Territory, Canada. I conducted an experiment investigating
        elevation-dependent patterns of seed herbivory, the data from
        which form part of a larger latitudinal study. Other work
        included the collection of a multitude of plant traits,
        ecological monitoring of vegetation cover, and investigating
        soil decomposition rates following the protocol of the
        International Tea Bag Index (www.decolab.org/tbi).
-   Jul-Sep 2015 - Field and lab assistant - University of Edinburgh -
    Dr. Pippa Stone
    -   Part of a 5 person field team for 2 months in Manú National
        Park, Peru. Work included physiological and morphological
        measurements of seedling and adult tree species both in the
        field and in rudimentary field laboratories, as well as
        competition measurements for which I designed and executed the
        methodology. Experience using a MINIPAM-II portable chlorophyll
        fluorescence meter.
-   May-Dec 2015 - Research assistant and data analyst - Centre for
    Ecology & Hydrology - Dr. Stephen Cavers
    -   Research assistant and data analyst for a common garden
        experiment investigating differentiation in Scots Pine seed
        stock in terms of growth, phenology and environmental
        resistance. I designed and conducted a study which investigated
        the resistance of tree seedlings to damage by pine weevils, an
        economically important pest of Scot’s pine in Scotland. In 2019
        I prepared a manuscript to be submitted in 2020 for peer-review
        related to the findings of the experiment.

Teaching & Outreach Experience

-   Sep 2018, 2019 - Field demonstrator for Ecological and Environmental
    Sciences field course
    -   I taught groups of 4th year undergraduate students on a week
        long field course in near Oban, Scotland. I designed a group
        research project and mentored a small group of 5 students in
        their experimental design, data collection and analysis. I also
        ran optional clinics on the operation of hemispherical
        photography equipment for measuring tree canopy structure.
-   Oct 2017-Present - Web developer for SEOSAW
    -   I designed and currently maintain the website for the SEOSAW
        network (Socio-ecological Observatory for Southern African
        Woodlands), using Jekyll, Bitbucket Pipelines, and Github-Pages.
        Notably, I implemented an interactive Javascript leaflet map of
        study sites, using geoJSON data compiled from the SEOSAW dataset
        using R. (seosaw.github.io).
-   Jan 2017-May 2019 - Copywriter for Agricology sustainable farming
    magazine
    -   Part of a team of seven, writing summaries of online resources
        on the Agricology website. I write approximately two articles
        per month when requested, with a particular focus on soil
        enrichment and pollinator services. This work has given me
        valuable experience in writing for an informed but non-academic
        audience, as the websites target audience is farmers.
        Additionally, I have gained experience in working remotely,
        taking advantage of version control software for effective
        editing. (agricology.co.uk).
-   Oct 2016-Dec 2018 - Co-founder, tutorial designer, tutor for coding
    proficiency initiative (Coding Club) - University of Edinburgh
    -   Founding member of team which set up a peer-to-peer learning
        environment for students and staff to overcome statistics
        anxiety and provide training in useful programming skills for
        the biological and environmental sciences. Key duties include
        creating online tutorials using Markdown and HTML, delivering
        tutorials to classes of up to 30 students/staff. Focusses
        include Shiny Web-Applications, hierarchical modelling,
        reproducible research using R Markdown. In 2017, Coding Club ran
        a workshop at the SEECC conference in Aberdeen on manipulating
        big data, attended by ~25 people. In December 2017, Coding Club
        delivered a workshop at the British Ecology Society Annual
        Meeting in Ghent. (ourcodingclub.github.io).
-   Sep 2015-Apr 2016 - Interpretation resources designer - Midlothian
    Ranger Service
    -   I designed an interpretation panel to be installed in Roslin
        Glen, a Midlothian Country Park. The panel demonstrates the
        historical land use of the glen and the resulting landscape
        features. I also designed a series of factsheets for use in
        secondary schools and a QR code walking route with more
        information. I presented to Lothian Conservation Volunteers and
        Friends of Roslin Glen to secure £1400 to manufacture the
        product and procure licenses.

Academic Service Positions

-   Mar 2018 - Organiser of the Scottish Tropical Ecology and Biology
    Student Meeting
    -   Along with two others, I led organisation of this small 1 day
        conference hosted by the Royal Botanic Gardens Edinburgh and the
        University of Edinburgh. The conference was attended by ~50
        people, with 17 speakers and a midday skills workshop on
        creating effective academic posters. Together we secured in
        excess of £1500 of funding from the British Ecological Society,
        the University of Edinburgh Institute for Academic Development
        and the Royal Botanic Gardens Edinburgh.
-   Sep 2013-Jul 2016 - Ecological and Environmental Sciences Student
    Representative
    -   Year wide representative for degree programme. Acted as a
        liaison for student issues with staff, course content,
        deadlines, pastoral care.
-   Sep 2015-Jul 2016 - School of GeoSciences Convener
    -   Elected student association position at Edinburgh University
        Student’s Association, representing the School of GeoSciences at
        Student Council and various other committees including the
        architectural board for the construction of a new GeoSciences
        faculty building. Skills developed in project planning,
        effective representation, creative problem solving, committee
        chairing.
-   2013-2016 - Project Co-ordinator, Edinburgh University Conservation
    Volunteers
    -   Liaison with Park Rangers and shared responsibilities with one
        other society co-ordinator to organise and direct group
        excursions for between 10 and 40 students, weekly during the
        university semester. Developed skills in logistics, team
        supervision. More practical skills in forestry, wooden
        construction, tool maintenance. Organisation of weekend
        residential excursions including cooking, transport and
        accommodation for up to 30 people.

Quantitative and Programming Skills

-   R - Generalised linear mixed effects models using lme4/nlme and
    model selection using MuMIn. Structural Equation Modelling with
    lavaan and semPlot. Manipulation of large datasets using dplyr,
    including the Living Planet Index and GBIF databases. Batch data
    manipulation and analysis using the apply family. Spatial grid
    analysis using the spatstat package. Data presentation and analysis
    using the ggplot2 package. Experience using R Markdown to produce
    reproducible scripts and knowledge of creating Shiny HTML5 web-apps.
-   QGIS - Experience creating maps for publication and using GDAL both
    within QGIS and directly on the command line to manipulate and
    transform spatial data files. Integration of QGIS with online
    spatial databases such as SentinelHub and OpenLayers.
-   LaTeX - Experience constructing short and long documents with
    tabular and graphical elements for myself and others. Integration of
    citation management software, custom BibTeX .bib files and
    templating with custom .sty files. Creating custom Beamer
    presentation templates.
-   Git - Experience managing ourcodingclub.github.io and teaching
    resources using Git version control, branch management with multiple
    collaborators, closing issues, troubleshooting with git diff. In
    2018 I ran two workshops at the University of Edinburgh on using Git
    on the command line.
-   Markdown - Tutorials written and delivered using Markdown syntax,
    integration of R, LaTeX, HTML and CSS languages in Markdown
    documents.
-   ImageJ - Advanced knowledge of area and colour threshold analysis
    using the ImageJ Macro Language.

Professional Associations

-   Botanical Society of Scotland (Student Member)
-   Royal Society of Biology (Affiliate Member)
-   British Ecological Society (Student Member)
-   Royal Scottish Geographical Society

------------------------------------------------------------------------

curl my contact card:

    curl -sL https://johngodlee.github.io/files/card
