Edinburgh Teaching Award - [2019-05-10]
=========================================

I’ve just finished a personal development training programme at the
University of Edinburgh called the Edinburgh Teaching Award, which aims
to encourage teachers to develop their skills in teaching and generally
pay attention to how they teach, rather than seeing it as a chore that
they HAVE to do. I received my certificate from the Higher Education
Academy today which says that I’m now an Associate Fellow. Following
that, I figured I would post here the reflective short articles that
formed my submissions for the Teaching Award.



DISCUSSING STUDY DESIGN


When facilitating discussion groups for the purpose of designing student
group projects, I find that initially they begin very quietly,
regardless of the students’ level of experience. I considered that this
grew from students not knowing what to expect from this particular
discussion, they didn’t know what to talk about as this was their first
time meeting together. Gibbs (2014) suggests that a teacher should aim
to set student expectations early and make students aware of their place
in the classroom heirarchy (A5, K2). To remedy this fear of the unknown
and to help set students’ expectations for the tone of the discussion, I
avoided overly open-ended questions like “What hypothesis do you want to
test?”, early on in the discussion. From earlier teaching experience I
have found that these kinds of questions favour a particular kind of
student who is quick and confident in their response, and can lead to
the rest of the discussion being dominated in this way; most students
want time to contemplate their choices before vocalising. Instead I
asked more tangible, directed questions on a narrow topic, though
related to the larger subject. Questions such as “Who can tell me one
environmental factor they think affects forest canopy cover”. This
helped to build confidence and get the students to think about the topic
in approachable, testable terms, rather than being overwhelmed by the
seemingly infinite possibilities of designing a study. During a 4th year
discussion I asked one of the students to take note of the answers to
these ‘brainstorming’ questions, which we then used as a jumping-off
point for part of the discussion, which turned into a lively debate. In
the 4th year discussions, I felt confident relinquishing my role as
leader at this point, as students already knew the different steps of
developing a research question and were more confident in their approach
to group discussion. In these cases I remained present in the discussion
group, acting as a peer within the group rather than a leader.

In my 2nd year group I found that there was a large disparity in how
interested individual students were in the discussion process, and also
greater uncertainty in debating certain aspects of the experimental
design, such as statistical analysis. I adopted the advice of Rogers
(1969) and attempted to provide a “facilitative degree of structure” to
the study design process. During these discussions I had to remain more
present to encourage deep thinking and make students aware of the
possible lines of inquiry the study could follow. However, I made sure
to allow the students to come to their own conclusion of what method to
follow. In order to ensure that all students took an active role in the
discussion group, even if they didn’t say much during the discussion
itself, I asked each student to produce a concise set of minutes on what
was discussed in the first part of the meeting, and to record anything
they “didn’t think of until after the session”. These points were then
discussed during the second, shorter part of the meeting. This
post-discussion evaluation helped quieter students to contribute to the
discussion without needing to keep up with the louder students during
the main discussion (V1, V2).

References:

Gibbs, G. (2014). 53 Powerful ideas all teachers should know about.
Staff and Educational Development (SEDA) Online blog. Available at:
https://www.seda.ac.uk/53-powerful-ideas/. Last accessed: 19th Sep 2018

Rogers, C. R., & View, L. A. (1969). Freedom to Learn: A View of What
Education Might Become. Columbus, OH: Merrill Pub. Co. 



REMAINING VISIBLE THROUGHOUT DATA COLLECTION


Harland (2012) suggests that “The chance corridor conversation can be as
critical to a student’s learning as the structured tutorial” (V3). I
considered this during my teaching on a field course. Although the 4th
year students were largely left to their own devices deliberately, and
demonstrators were told they didn’t have to follow their groups around,
I made sure that I was available and visible throughout the day, so my
students could easily come and ask me questions when they needed to. I
positioned myself in public areas and aimed to check in with my groups
at least once every 2.5 hours during the working day. I also met with my
students in the evening to discuss how the day had gone in an informal
manner. While these periods of “checking-in” appeared to the students to
be just that, I attempted to use the time to stimulate discussion and
prompt self-evaluation of the work so far, with some formative feedback
from me when appropriate (A3). I also tried to prompt students to think
about the details of the methods they had been using and taught them
finer details (K1). One such example being the use of hemispherical
photography of forest canopies, a complex technique which requires some
knowledge of optics to truly understand. I found that during these _post
hoc_ discussions the students were much more engaged than when I
attempted to teach them before they had used the photography equipment,
presumably because it was easier to link this abstract knowledge to
something more tangible (Boud et al. 1985).

There is often a temptation to get things done as quickly as possible
during fieldwork, with students preferring to stick with a bad
methodology rather than change to a new one due to a perceived waste of
time if they switch. In contrast, critically evaluating methodology and
potentially switching to a new or adapted method is a valuable learning
experience which mirrors real research, and should therefore be
encouraged (V4).

References

Boud, D., Keogh, R., & Walker, D. (1985). Reflection: turning experience
into learning. _Learning_.

Harland, T. (2012). University Teaching. London: Routledge.



QUANTITATIVE SKILLS IN ECOLOGY


The difficulties of effectively teaching quantitative skills in my field
(ecology) are well known (Barraquand et al. 2014). For many
undergraduate ecologists, learning about mathematics and statistics is
not what they signed up for (Duffy 2017). Knowledge of how and when to
apply different statistical methods however, is vital for graduating
ecologists looking to continue in research. It is also a desirable skill
in industry outside of the life sciences, with many graduate positions
preferring students with a background in R, the current industry
standard for statistical computing (TIOBE 2018) (V4). The question then,
is how to support learning of quantitative skills (A2) and develop
effective learning environments for teaching statistics (A4).

In conversations I’ve had with undergrauate ecologists, they often speak
of having a ‘fear’ of statistics. Probing deeper, this fear is actually
a composite of a fear of mathematics and of computer programming (V2).
For many, this fear has developed through repeated exposure to
traditional statistics classes which merely reinforce that this is an
arcane, impenetrable, and fundamentally boring field.

In 2016, along with a fellow undergraduate, we set up Coding Club
(https://ourcodingclub.github.io), a learning network with an online
presence and in-person workshops which focusses on collectively teaching
each other about statistics, in a peer-to-peer fashion. We hold weekly
workshops based on changing themes such as linear models or spatial data
visualisation.

We found that leaving most of the learning in the hands of the students
is a much more effective teaching model for quantitative skills, which
require practice and critical evaluation at the student’s own pace,
which will of course be different to that of others in the class.
Students often said they felt like they had failed when the group moved
on before they had fully understood what they had coded (V2). It’s not
that quantitative skills are necessarily hard or easy by their nature,
it’s rather that they take time, and that this time varies between
students. This is why a non-conventional learning environment like
Coding Club works so well. We decided to avoid the model of another
popular quantitative skills program called Data Carpentry
(https://datacarpentry.org), which focusses a lot on “live coding” by a
demonstrator. In practice, while this method can convey a lot of
information in a short period of time, it is debatable whether that
learning is ‘deep’, does the student know why they typed the code (V3)?
When a student has a problem during a Coding Club workshop, whether that
is to do with the prescribed theme or something that they have brought
in from outside, we encourage small groups to form in an _ad hoc_ manner
so multiple people can talk about the issue, which is often resolved
much quicker than a single student staring at code on a screen and with
benefits for both the _impromptu_ teacher and the student. Conversation
helps to rationalise issues which are initially abstract and difficult
to solve (V1). Unfortunately, current provision of teaching hours and
the teacher:student ratio in many undergraduate quantitative skills
classes precludes teaching in this manner, hence why we felt it was
necessary to act outside of the prescribed timetable.

References

Barraquand, F., Ezard, T. H., Jørgensen, P. S., Zimmerman, N.,
Chamberlain, S., Salguero-Gómez, R., Curran, T. J., Poisot, T. (2014).
Lack of quantitative training among early-career ecologists: a survey of
the problem and potential solutions. PeerJ, 2, e285.

Duffy, M. 2017. Poll results: How mathy are ecology, evolution, and
genetics? [Online] [Accessed 21st Nov 2018]. Available at:
https://dynamicecology.wordpress.com/2017/09/25/poll-results-how-mathy-are-ecology-evolution-and-genetics/

TIOBE 2018. TIOBE Index for November 2018. [Online] [Accessed 21st Nov
2018]. \ Available at: https://www.tiobe.com/tiobe-index/
